RFC: Nested Cargo packages (#3452)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-nested-publish.md

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

There are a number of reasons why a Rust developer currently may feel the need to create multiple library crates, and therefore multiple Cargo packages (since one package contains at most one library crate). These multiple libraries could be:

* A trait declaration and a corresponding derive macro (which must be defined in a separate proc-macro library).
* A library that uses a build script that uses another library or binary (e.g. for precomputation or bindings generation).
* A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Currently, developers must publish these packages separately. This has several disadvantages (see the [Rationale](#rationale-and-alternatives) section for further details):

* Clutters the public view of the registry with packages not intended to be usable on their own, and which may even become obsolete as internal architecture changes.
* Requires multiple `cargo publish` operations (this could be fixed with bulk publication) and writing public metadata for each package.

> * Can result in semver violations and thus compilation failures, due to the developer not thinking about semver compatibility within the group.

Reviewer: While some of these indirectly touch on it, one I'd explicitly add is sheer boilerplate.

In working on #3424, one of the things I've noticed is the commentary from people who are looking to further drop boilerplate.  This also came up in a recent blogpost and [HN discussion of it](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=36233862)

Author: This proposal will still require `Cargo.toml`s for each nested package. What boilerplate do you see removing (besides e.g. explanatory `README.md` files)?

Reviewer: Any of the standard manifest fields that crates.io requires.  Granted workspace inheritance helps with those (which will automatically be used in `cargo new` in 1.72) but much nicer if we can just leave them out

Combine that with "cargo script" (if we support `[lib]` packages) and you might not even need manifests (even ones embedded in source)

Author: I couldn't find a definitive statement of exactly which fields `crates.io` _requires_ to compare to. <https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/publishing.html#before-publishing-a-new-crate> implies it is one, but isn't really (e.g. `homepage` is not mandatory).

This RFC will allow developers to avoid all of these inconveniences and hazards by publishing a single package.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

By default (and always, prior to this RFC's implementation):

* If your package contains any sub-packages, Cargo [excludes](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html#the-exclude-and-include-fields) them from the `.crate` archive file produced by `cargo package` and `cargo publish`.

> * If your package contains any non-`dev` dependencies which do not give a `version = "..."`, it cannot be published to `crates.io`.

Reviewer: We should also call out the dev-dependcency behavior of stripping them if they lack `version` fields.

Author: I wasn't aware that was exactly what happened, but I can see how it must be.

(By “**sub-package**” we mean a package (directory with `Cargo.toml`) which is a subdirectory of another package. We shall call the outermost such package, the package being published, the “**parent package**”.)

You can change this default by placing in the manifest (`Cargo.toml`) of a sub-package:

```toml
[package]
publish = "nested"
```

If this is done, Cargo's behavior changes as follows:

* If you publish the parent package, the sub-package is included in the `.crate` file (unless overridden by explicit `exclude`/`include`) and will be available to the parent package whenever the parent package is downloaded and compiled.

> * The parent package may have a `path =` dependency upon the sub-package. (This dependency may not have a `version =` specified.)

Reviewer: I would instead word this as

- If you publish a parent package with a path dependency to this sub-package, it will be included in the `.crate` file
- The dependency on the sub-package may not have a "registry" dependency (e.g. `version` field)

Author: > If you publish a parent package with a path dependency to this sub-package, it will be included in the `.crate` file

That's not just a different explanation, that's a different behavior. I intentionally kept “what files are published” decoupled from “is there an edge in the dependency graph”; this means that the file inclusion rules are kept simple and local. (Also, if the future possibility of public sub-packages comes to pass, then there would not be such a dependency edge, so there would need to be another rule to include those.)

I don't think it's a good idea to DWIM file inclusion too much because it can already go wrong. I've personally accidentally published a compiled binary inside a package because of some of its choices (not related to subpackages).

That said, I see the logic behind including packages only if they will be actually used. I'm just not yet convinced it's wise.

Reviewer: - We should be somewhat mindful of bulk.  This could especially be bad in workspaces with a root package as that root package will pick up *every(* sub-package in the workspace.
- Maybe its just me but I feel like the logic for inclusion (implementation and in education) is much nicer when we are limiting it to direct path dependencies rather than
  - implementation:  "scan every workspace member and see if its a child"
  - education: dealing with "distant" effects (magically picking things up despite there being no explicit relationship)

Author: The root package scenario is convincing to me that we need it to be dependency-aware. I will think about how to revise the RFC; this has a lot of potential consequences.

Author: I have now updated the RFC text to specify that nested publishing requires `dependencies.*.publish = "nested"` in addition to the previous requirements before it will activate.

* You cannot `cargo publish` the sub-package, just as if it had `publish = false`. (This is a safety measure against accidentally publishing the sub-package separately when this is not intended.)

Nested sub-packages may be freely placed within other nested sub-packages.

When a group of packages is published in this way, and depended on, this has a number of useful effects (which are not things that Cargo explicitly implements, just consequences of the system):

> * The packages are versioned in lockstep; there is no way for a version mismatch to arise since all the code was published together. Version resolution does not apply (in the same way that it does not for any other `path =` dependency).

Reviewer: I think what you are intending to say here is that they are an atomic set, that you can't have mixed "versions" by the nature of the path dependency.

However, my initial reading of this was that we were going to have some special behavior around the `package.version` field.

Author: Reworded.

While thinking about how to word this, I also thought of another drawback: given multiple major versions of the parent, subpackages will end up duplicated where they might not have been if separately published.

* **Build process**
    * Probably some messages will need to be adjusted; currently, `path` dependencies' full paths are always printed in progress messages, but they would be long noise here (`/home/alice/.cargo/registry/src/index.crates.io-6f17d22bba15001f/...`). Perhaps progress for sub-packages could look something like “`Compiling foo/macros v0.1.0`”.

The presence or absence of a `[workspace]` has no effect on the new behavior, just as it has no effect on existing package publication.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This increases the number of differences between “Cargo package (on disk)” from “Cargo package (that may be published in a registry, or downloaded as a unit)” in a way which may be confusing; it would be good if we have different words for these two entities, but we don't.
* If Cargo were to add support for multiple libraries per package, that would be largely redundant with this feature.
* It is not possible to publish a bug fix to a sub-package without republishing the entire parent package.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> 

Reviewer: Could you explicitly compare this to
- https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/inline-crates/
- https://poignardazur.github.io/2023/01/24/subcrates/

And, if it isn't already, incorporate any of the commentary that would be relevant to this proposal (motivation, future possibilities, drawbacks)

* Clutters the public view of the registry with packages not intended to be usable on their own, and which may even become obsolete as internal architecture changes.
* Requires multiple `cargo publish` operations (this could be fixed with bulk publication) and writing public metadata for each package.
* Can result in semver violations and thus compilation failures, due to the developer not thinking about semver compatibility within the group.

This RFC will allow developers to avoid all of these inconveniences and hazards by publishing a single package.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

By default (and always, prior to this RFC's implementation):

* If your package contains any sub-packages, Cargo [excludes](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html#the-exclude-and-include-fields) them from the `.crate` archive file produced by `cargo package` and `cargo publish`.
* If your package contains any non-`dev` dependencies which do not give a `version = "..."`, it cannot be published to `crates.io`.
* If your package contains `[dev-dependencies]` which do not give a `version = "..."`, they are stripped out on publication.

> (By “**sub-package**” we mean a package (directory with `Cargo.toml`) which is a subdirectory of another package. We shall call the outermost such package, the package being published, the “**parent package**”.)

Reviewer 2: You might consider moving your term definitions to the top of the "Guide-level explanation" section, and making it a bit more formal.

For example:
## Definitions
- A **package** is a directory with a `Cargo.toml` file
- A **sub-package** is a **package** that is a subdirectory of another **package**
- A **parent package** is the outermost **package** which is actually published to the registry

Author: Done.

> (By “**sub-package**” we mean a package (directory with `Cargo.toml`) which is a subdirectory of another package. We shall call the outermost such package, the package being published, the “**parent package**”.)

Reviewer: Do we need to restrict these "sub-packages" to being in sub-directories of their parent?
1. This prevents multiple packages vendoring the same package
2. There is a preference by some ([example](https://matklad.github.io/2021/08/22/large-rust-workspaces.html)) to have flat workspaces (myself included)
3. We could even consider expanding this to other forms of dependencies like `git` dependencies

Implementation wise, we just package the crate to be within the right directory hierarchy and update the path dependencies.  This could be listed in "Future Possibilities" (if the design doesn't block it) or in Alternatives / Drawbacks (if the design blocks it)

Author: > This prevents multiple packages vendoring the same package

IMO, this is a feature, not a bug. I'm trying to avoid creating any code duplication that would not already exist. I can imagine the use cases otherwise, though (e.g. an author might want to use an unstable “utilities” package within several packages).

> Implementation wise, we just package the crate to be within the right directory hierarchy

This could create name conflicts with files already present in the package. How do you see addressing that? It could be just an error, but in general, I don't like this kind of namespace conflation — my experience is that it will eventually bite somebody. Though I can't currently imagine a case that couldn't be worked around, since by definition the sub-packages being packaged this way can be renamed.

If this were to be supported, I would rather see the full set of packages archived as siblings in the `.crate`, so their filenames cannot conflict.

Reviewer 3: It would be possible to include a "utilities" package as nested within multiple other packages via symlinks, as is done currently for things like distributing `LICENSE` in multiple crates of a single workspace.

Reviewer 3: This error makes me wonder: how would cargo handle having a nested package which has a name overlap with a (transitive) dependency? (what registry is a nested package considered to be part of?) Would it be possible to `patch` a nested package, or would you have to patch the outer package as a whole?

Reviewer: > IMO, this is a feature, not a bug. I'm trying to avoid creating any code duplication that would not already exist. I can imagine the use cases otherwise, though (e.g. an author might want to use an unstable “utilities” package within several packages).

I was specifically thinking of these "utilities" style scenarios, much like C++ "headers only" libraries.  See also https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/idea-light-weight-reusable-dependencies/17099

> This could create name conflicts with files already present in the package. How do you see addressing that? It could be just an error, but in general, I don't like this kind of namespace conflation — my experience is that it will eventually bite somebody. Though I can't currently imagine a case that couldn't be worked around, since by definition the sub-packages being packaged this way can be renamed.

Since its a new feature, we can define what we want and people have to deal with it.   One simple way of doing that is putting them in a `.crates/`.  You could make the directory be `.crates/<pkg-name>` and error if there are duplicates, `.crates/<ws-root-to-pkg-root-rel-path>` with some special handling for anything that doesn't fit within that model, etc.

The own downside to making everything a sibling is it removes the "it just works" nature of this proposal as we'd need to have special handling for finding the root item of the registry package compared to normal registry packages.

Author: OK, having `.crates/` (or something else left open as an implementation choice) seems reasonable, especially given the [previous discussion](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3452#discussion_r1248385691) where we agreed that nested packages should be selected based on dependencies or something, not just directory containment. I have not yet rewritten the RFC to address that (and may not any time soon; I'm having a bit of hand pain and using dictation for half these words, which isn't great for thinking and rewriting).

Author: I have now updated the RFC text to allow nested packages that don't live inside the parent package's directory.

You can change this default by placing in the manifest (`Cargo.toml`) of a sub-package:

```toml
[package]

> publish = "nested"

Reviewer 4: Bikeshedding, but I feel like there could/should be a better way to indicate this.

Author: Can you say more about what would make a solution better? I think it is an important safety feature that a nested package is declared ineligible for standalone publication at the same time it is made eligible for nesting, to avoid unintended duplication (though this _could_ be done by checking parent directories instead).

Reviewer 4: Honestly, I'm not sure what I'd like it to look like. It just _feels_ less than ideal. I know that isn't very helpful, admittedly.

Reviewer: It could be on the dependency like in the blog post I linked elsewhere.

Author: This is a good alternative to have considered, but I don't think it is wise. I have added the following text to Alternatives explaining:

> Similar to the previous, we could allow marking specific `[dependencies]` as “include this for publication”. However, this would make it impossible to publish a nested package which is not a dependency of the parent package, which blocks the future possibility of public targets in nested packages (particularly, installable binary targets in sub-packages, which will frequently depend on the parent and not vice versa).

(I haven't yet gotten to reading those posts.)

* If you publish the parent package, the sub-package is included in the `.crate` file (unless overridden by explicit `exclude`/`include`) and will be available to the parent package whenever the parent package is downloaded and compiled.
* The parent package (and other sub-packages) may have `path =` dependencies upon the sub-package. (Such dependencies must not have a `version =` or `git =`; that is, the `path` must be the _only_ source for the dependency.)
* You cannot `cargo publish` the sub-package, just as if it had `publish = false`. (This is a safety measure against accidentally publishing the sub-package separately when this is not intended.)

Nested sub-packages may be freely placed within other nested sub-packages.

When a group of packages is published in this way, and depended on, this has a number of useful effects (which are not things that Cargo explicitly implements, just consequences of the system):

* The packages are a single unit for all versioning purposes; there is no way for a version mismatch to arise since all the code was published together. Version resolution does not apply (in the same way that it does not for any other `path =` dependency).

> * The sub-package is effectively “private”: it cannot be named by any other package on `crates.io`, only by its parent package and sibling sub-packages.

Reviewer 4: This should probably be clarified that it's private insomuch as it's not automatically public. It would still be possible to re-export something (or everything).

Reviewer: See also https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3452#discussion_r1251086543

Reviewer: With "effectively", I feel like this is trying to describe the semantics and then describe the relevant mechanism.

For me, I like the first part (effectively "private").  For the second, I'd change it to "it cannot be named **as a dependency** by any other package...".  I think this would clarify that "private" is referring to the package aspect and not what is being done within the Rust APIs.

Author: I have added “cannot be named as a dependency” and explicitly mentioned that re-exports are still possible.

> * The sub-package is effectively “private”: it cannot be named by any other package on `crates.io`, only by its parent package and sibling sub-packages.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The sub-package is hidden: it cannot be named by any other package on `crates.io`, only by its parent package and sibling sub-packages.
```

Reviewer: See also https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3452#discussion_r1248394983

Author: Reworded and expanded in the ways @epage suggested.

## Example: trait and derive macro

Suppose we want to declare a trait-and-derive-macro package. We can do this as follows. The parent package would have this manifest `foo/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "foo"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
publish = true

[dependencies]
foo-macros = { path = "macros" }    # newly permitted
```

The sub-package manifest `foo/macros/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "macros"                     # this name need not be claimed on crates.io
version = "0.1.0"                   # this version is not used for dependency resolution
edition = "2021"
publish = "nested"                  # new syntax

[lib]
proc-macro = true
```

Then you can `cargo publish` from within the parent `foo` directory, and this will create a single `foo` package on `crates.io`, with no `macros` (or `foo-macros`) package visible except when inspecting the source code or in compilation progress messages.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> The following changes must be made across Cargo and `crates.io`:

Reviewer: For the "Reference-level explanation", the focus should less be on what would be changed and more on strictly defining the syntax and meaning in a way that doesn't fit within the Guide

For example, you should cover what states are valid and invalid

Author: Done.

* **Manifest schema**

>     * The Cargo manifest now allows `"nested"` as a value for the `package.publish` key.

Reviewer: As it is already a term in `cargo`, I actually lean towards `"vendor"`

Author: I get the similarity, but vendoring normally means making a _copy_ of a package that is available by other means, and one of the design goes here is to _discourage_ any such copies existing (because they are likely to be accidental, and if they aren't, then they may create the same kinds of problems as multiple major versions do). I think reusing the term would create more confusion than it avoids.

Reviewer: > vendoring normally means making a copy of a package that is available by other means, an

The perspective I was using when I came up with "vendor" was that  instead of getting a dependency through the registry, we are copying it into our package.  Its not vendored within the repo but in the `.crate` file.

This also ties into whether we should generalize this across dependency sources at which point it feels like it becomes even more applicable.

Author: I still don't think that vendoring is the right term, _especially_ as one of the things that came up during my review of prior art is the concept of using nested-packages-or-whatever _for_ vendoring, e.g. to fix a bug before upstream accepts the patch — I think these need to be kept distinct ideas.

That being considered, what do we need to do here with the RFC text to resolve this thread? Should there be an unresolved question for terminology, or can we just proceed as-is?

Reviewer 6: I think "vendoring" isn't all-inclusive of the situations where one might use this. Usually vendoring refers to "taking some third party dependency's entire source code and jamming it into to some `vendor/whatever` directory (or sometimes via a git submodule) for _reasons_". I don't think it makes sense to use this term in scenarios where the nested crate _isn't_ third party, which I think will actually be most of the time with this feature

Author: I haven't seen any "seconding" of support for the `"vendor"` name, so I'm going to keep `"nested"` and resolve this. (Of course, there might be some third or fourth better idea to be found…)

Reviewer: At least keeping this unresolved to centralize any name bikeshedding conversations

* **`crates.io`**
    * Should allow `path` dependencies that were previously prohibited, at least provided that the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file. The path must not contain any upward traversal (`../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components.
* **Build process**
    * Probably some messages will need to be adjusted; currently, `path` dependencies' full paths are always printed in progress messages, but they would be long noise here (`/home/alice/.cargo/registry/src/index.crates.io-6f17d22bba15001f/...`). Perhaps progress for sub-packages could look something like “`Compiling foo/macros v0.1.0`”.

The presence or absence of a `[workspace]` has no effect on the new behavior, just as it has no effect on existing package publication.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This increases the number of differences between “Cargo package (on disk)” from “Cargo package (that may be published in a registry, or downloaded as a unit)” in a way which may be confusing; it would be good if we have different words for these two entities, but we don't.

> * If Cargo were to add support for multiple libraries per package, that would be largely redundant with this feature.

Reviewer 4: Not necessarily! Having a library that is strictly internal would be useful nonetheless.

Author: Removed this line.

> * It is not possible to publish a bug fix to a sub-package without republishing the entire parent package.

Reviewer 4: Arguably this isn't a drawback. Personally, I pin the version of the internal dependencies for `time`, and I'm fairly certain this is done for other projects as well.

Reviewer: I have a PR out for documenting common patterns for version requirements and have this noted for at least proc macros.

Reviewer: #12323

- Feature Name: `nested_publish`
- Start Date: 2023-06-30
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3452](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3452)
- Rust Issue: ...

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow Cargo packages to be bundled within other Cargo packages when they are published (not just in unpublished workspaces).

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

There are a number of reasons why a Rust developer currently may feel the need to create multiple library crates, and therefore multiple Cargo packages (since one package contains at most one library crate). These multiple libraries could be:

* A trait declaration and a corresponding derive macro (which must be defined in a separate proc-macro library).
* A library that uses a build script that uses another library or binary (e.g. for precomputation or bindings generation).

> * A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Reviewer 7: The whole document talks only about libraries but I assume it would work as well for binaries published to crates.io?

Reviewer: Yeah, the language should likely be updated to "'package" to generalize it

Author: This is specifically a list of use cases for _multiple libraries_, the thing that you _cannot at all_ currently publish in a single package to crates.io. I've added a secondary list including the use case of binaries sharing a purely private library, and the use case of binaries that are themselves in nested packages will require further design as noted in the "Future possibilities" section.

## Example: trait and derive macro

Suppose we want to declare a trait-and-derive-macro package. We can do this as follows. The parent package would have this manifest `foo/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "foo"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
publish = true

[dependencies]
foo-macros = { path = "macros" }    # newly permitted
```

The sub-package manifest `foo/macros/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "macros"                     # this name need not be claimed on crates.io
version = "0.1.0"                   # this version is not used for dependency resolution
edition = "2021"
publish = "nested"                  # new syntax

[lib]
proc-macro = true
```

Then you can `cargo publish` from within the parent `foo` directory, and this will create a single `foo` package on `crates.io`, with no `macros` (or `foo-macros`) package visible except when inspecting the source code or in compilation progress messages.

# Reference-level explanation

> [reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Reviewer 8: I'm missing a section on how we want to make this work with the [crate index](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io-index).

We could just skip the all dependencies to a subpackage, but then the dependencies of that subpackage would be missed by the resolver.

If we add some new structure inside the index format to support subpackages then we will need to ensure it doesn't break older cargo implementations.

Reviewer: They key part here for cargo's resolver is that it operates on the index with a `Summary` for each package, without downloading the `.crate` files.  This is a way the proposal is different than traditional path dependencies: normal path dependencies are expected to always be there without any kind of `Summary` while anything associated with the registry is not.

Even if this wasn't a problem for cargo, I think that'd be bad for the Index to have holes where it says "trust somthing else to fill in this hole" but that it should be self-consistent.

Reviewer: Been thinking about this more.

I think the way to approach this is: when running `cargo package`, flatten nested package features and dependencies into the current package starting at the deepest dependency and recursing up to the selected package.  When `cargo publish` uploads a `Summary`, we will generate it from this flattened set of dependencies, ignoring the nested dependencies that are still left.  This would mean that the package in the Index shows up as if there are no nested packages.  We then resolve dependencies without consideration for the nested packages (we won't know they exist when they come from the registry).  When we build, we'll need to take into account the difference between the resolver graph and the unit graph, if we don't already.

In effect, we are making the parsing of the root crate in the `.crate` look as if nested packages don't exist.

Why
- Minimizes load on the Index and in dependency resolution because there aren't entries for these anonymous packages where there is no effect / no decisions need to be made
- Isolates the special cases to just building up the unit graph, rather than also dealing with it during resolution, by the registries, etc
- Makes things easy for registries that use the Summary or registries that recreate it from `Cargo.toml` like crates.io (no complex package parsing logic needed)

Author: I've added a paragraph on this to the RFC text: "The package index does not explicitly represent nested packages; instead, nested packages' dependencies are flattened into the dependencies of the parent package."

The following changes must be made across Cargo and `crates.io`:

* **Manifest schema**
    * The Cargo manifest now allows `"nested"` as a value for the `package.publish` key.
* **`cargo package` &amp; `cargo publish`**
    * Should refuse to publish a package if that package (not its sub-packages) has `publish = "nested"`.
    * Exclude/include rules should, upon finding a sub-package, check if it is `publish = "nested"` and not automatically exclude it. Instead, they should treat it like any other subdirectory; in particular, it should be affected by explicitly specified exclude/include rules.
    * Nested `Cargo.toml`s should be normalized in the same way the root `Cargo.toml` is, if they declare `publish = "nested"`, and not if they do not.
        * This avoids modifying the publication behavior for existing packages, even if they contain project templates or invoke `cargo` to compile sub-packages to probe the behavior of the compiler.
        * If the nested `Cargo.toml` has a syntax error such that its `package.publish` value cannot be determined, then if it is depended upon, emit an error; if it is not, emit a warning and do not normalize it.
* **`crates.io`**

>     * Should allow `path` dependencies that were previously prohibited, at least provided that the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file. The path must not contain any upward traversal (`../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components.

Reviewer 8: if I'm looking at https://crates.io/crates/serde/1.0.174/dependencies, what should it show after this RFC?

I see multiple options:
- it just shows a "nested" dependency without any details
- it shows a "nested" dependency, whose details can then also be shown in some way
- it shows a union of the top-level package and nested dependencies

The first option is certainly the one with the least amount of work for the crates.io team, but it would have security implications since it would now be very easy to hide malicious dependencies in the subpackages.

The second option would require us to significantly refactor our data structures to support unversioned subpackages in some way. Given our backlog I'm not sure how viable that would be.

The third option could work, but then we'd have a significant difference between the `Cargo.toml` content and what the website shows, so it isn't a great solution either.

Are there other options how we could implement this on the registry side? Also, keep in mind that this would most likely have to be supported by the 3rd party registries too.

Reviewer: > The third option could work, but then we'd have a significant difference between the Cargo.toml content and what the website shows, so it isn't a great solution either.

For me, from the users perspective the use of nested packages should be abstracted, so I would go with this option

> Are there other options how we could implement this on the registry side? Also, keep in mind that this would most likely have to be supported by the 3rd party registries too.

To clarify, I assume you mean if they provide a website with a similar dependency view as crates.io? 

I ask because we do need to keep in mind requirements for implementing a registry but an important distinction is minimum requirements vs additional clarifying features.

Reviewer 8: > To clarify, I assume you mean if they provide a website with a similar dependency view as crates.io?

not necessarily. if we change the index layout in some way (see my other comment) then 3rd party registries would have to support that too.

Reviewer: Yes, for index changes.  I was specifically talking in terms of the point raised here which seemed focused on the rendering.

Author: I've added discussion of the crates.io UI and index, and the lockfile, to the RFC text. I agree that for these purposes, nested package dependencies should probably be unioned into the parent package.

## Example: trait and derive macro

Suppose we want to declare a trait-and-derive-macro package. We can do this as follows. The parent package would have this manifest `foo/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "foo"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"
publish = true

[dependencies]
foo-macros = { path = "macros", publish = "nested" } # new syntax
```

The sub-package manifest `foo/macros/Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[package]
name = "macros"            # this name need not be claimed on crates.io
# version = "0.0.0"        # version number is not used and may be omitted
edition = "2021"
publish = "nested"         # new syntax

[lib]
proc-macro = true
```

Then you can `cargo publish` from within the parent directory `foo/`, and this will create a single `foo` package on `crates.io`, with no `macros` (or `foo-macros`) package visible except when inspecting the source code or in compilation progress messages.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Cargo: Manifest

Two new possible values are added to the manifest.

> * The `package.publish` field allows `"nested"` as a value, in addition to existing `false` and `true`. This value affects `cargo publish` and nested dependencies as described below.

Reviewer: This might be confusing with `package.publish = ["registry"]`.  We might need this to be `package.publish.nested = true` to reduce confusion.

We should probably make it explicit that this value is allowed if `package.version` is missing.

Author: Hmmmm. I was not aware of the array being an option. Now that I know it is one, perhaps nestedness _should_ be counted like a registry, since it is a "publishing destination" of sorts? Combining that and your idea, would

```toml
[package]
publish = [{nested = true}, "crates.io"]
```
then make sense as a way to specify that one wanted to permit that duplication?

Reviewer: With the sub-table approach, this could also be
```toml
[package]
publish.registries = ["crates.io"]
publish.nested = true
```
I lean towards this approach as I tried to keep the inline data structures simple and I expect this will be easier to reason about than ti fix different publish concepts into the array.

Author: I've revised the syntax as you propose. Note that this has the default outcome that

```toml
[package]
publish.registries = true
publish.nested = true
```

is also valid.

> * The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency. (If desired, `publish = false` could be also be permitted to explicitly document an intent not to nest; this would be identical to the status quo and to omitting the key.)

Reviewer: `true`/`false` could represent dependencies to strip when published.

Author: I'm not sure whether you mean "let's make `publish = false` strip the dependency" or "`publish = false` could be misinterpreted to mean stripping the dependency". I agree with the latter now that it's pointed out; the former would be an incomplete feature because making a package still compilable with removed dependencies would, in many cases, also mean removing some feature declarations.

Reviewer: Cargo today strips some dependencies on publish (and yes, cleaning up of features was overlooked and there is an open issue).

I think it would be reasonable for us to have an explicit mechanism to talk about the existing implicit behavior.  This could always be a future possibility within the scope of this RFC.

Author: OK, so `publish = false` is *plausibly* “when publishing, delete this dependency”. I think I'd like to not specify that as part of this RFC, though, since as discussed above it's not completely straightforward. I'll change the text to say that no values other than `"nested"` are defined by this RFC, and later we can decide to add `publish = false` or `publish = "strip"`.

Reviewer 9: > and later we can decide to add `publish = false` or `publish = "strip"`.

Just as a data point, when I see `strip`, I expect it to have something to do with this construct.

```toml
[profile.whatever]
strip="..."
```

...so I'd throw in for either `publish = false` or something like `publish="omit"`.

Reviewer: I would at least like to see it mentioned as a future possibility to show how we can use this field for other cases (to justify why it isn't `nested = true`)

Author: > I would at least like to see it mentioned as a future possibility…

Done.

> * The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency. (If desired, `publish = false` could be also be permitted to explicitly document an intent not to nest; this would be identical to the status quo and to omitting the key.)

Reviewer: We need to define the semantics for workspace inheritance. Options:
- Allow it in `workspace.dependencies` and allow overriding it in `dependencies`
- Only allow it in `dependencies`

For myself, I regret us putting any non-source information in `workspace.dependencies` and lean towards `dependencies`.  We can always re-evaluate it later.

Author: Done; I have specified that `package.publish` may be inherited but `dependencies.*.publish` may not be, for now.

    * It is an error if a nested dependency does not have a `path` field, or if it has a `version`, `git`, or any other package source field, unless future work defines a meaning for that combination.

When a nested dependency is present (making its referent be a nested package), the following additional requirements apply:

* The nested package must have `package.publish = "nested"`; both `false` and `true` are errors.

> * If the nested package specifies `package.license`, the parent package's (not necessarily the dependent's) license expression must comply with the nested package's. This check is done solely in terms of the operators in the license expression. For example, if two nested packages contain licenses of `MIT` and `BSD-3-Clause`, then the parent package's expression must be `MIT AND BSD-3-Clause` or similar.

Reviewer: Licensing is complicated and I wouldn't feel comfortable with signing off on anything but
- exact match
- no rule

without some deep investigation

Author: I moved the idea of license checking other than equality to the future possibilities section.

  This check is intended only to prevent accidents (such as vendoring a third-party package without considering the implications of redistributing it). It is always valid to omit `package.license` from the nested package, thus making no machine-readable claims about its licensing independent from the parent package's.

> * We might want to explicitly prohibit nested packages from specifying a `package.version`, to avoid giving the misleading impression that it means anything. (`package.version` is already optional as of Cargo 1.75, but this is currently equivalent to `version = "0.0.0"`.)

Reviewer: As this is a "might", this should be covered in Unresolved Questions

Author: Moved to Unresolved Questions.

* The nested package may be in a subdirectory of the parent package directory. In this case, it is copied to the same location in the archive.
* Otherwise, it is copied to `.cargo/packages/<package name>/` within the archive.

`Cargo.toml` files for nested packages are rewritten in the same way as is already done for all packages, except that `path` dependencies which are nested dependencies are kept rather than stripped out or rejected as they currently are. Their path values may need to be rewritten to point to the nested paackages' new location in the archive.

## **`crates.io`**

`crates.io` will allow uploading of packages that contain `path` dependencies that were previously prohibited, as long as:

* The dependency is a valid nested dependency as defined above. This includes that the the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file, and has a valid `Cargo.toml` which declares `package.publish = "nested"`.
* The `path`s in all contained manifests must not contain any upward traversal outside of the parent package (`../../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components as determined to be necessary.

> The package index, and the `crates.io` user interface, does not explicitly represent nested packages; instead, nested packages' dependencies are flattened into the dependencies of the parent package when they are added to the index. This adequately reflects what can be expected when using the parent package. (Note that required dependencies of optional nested packages should become optional in the flattened form.)

Reviewer: we need to include flattening the effect of features

Author: Done.

* The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency.
    * It is an error if a nested dependency does not have a `path` field, or if it has a `version`, `git`, or any other package source field, unless future work defines a meaning for that combination.
    * Workspace inheritance is not permitted; the presence of `workspace.dependencies.*.publish` is an error.

When a nested dependency is present (making its referent be a nested package), the following additional requirements apply:

* The nested package must have `package.publish.nested = true`.
* If the nested package specifies `package.license`, its value must be identical to the parent package's.

  This check is intended only to prevent accidents (such as vendoring a third-party package without considering the implications of redistributing it). It is always valid to omit `package.license` from the nested package, thus making no machine-readable claims about its licensing.

> It is an error for a nested package to have the same package name as the parent package or any other nested package with the same parent package. This is validated by all Cargo operations that would generate or read a lockfile.

Reviewer: What is the rationale for this?  I'm assuming this is for when we move all of the packages into the same location but it'd be good to be explicit about it.

Author: > I'm assuming this is for when we move all of the packages into the same location

Yes.

I also expect there will be various other cases where we want to name the packages uniquely, including ones where it's not ideal but may be done temporarily for the first round of implementation, and by imposing this restriction, it's always sufficient to use some form of a (parent package name, nested package name) tuple.

As precedent, Cargo currently prohibits `path` dependencies with the same package name. But we do need to allow nested package names to be the same when they're in different parent packages, since otherwise packages could conflict with each other due to their implementation details. (I added a paragraph on that.)

- Feature Name: `nested_publish`
- Start Date: 2023-06-30
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3452](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3452)
- Rust Issue: ...

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow published Cargo packages to depend on other packages stored within themselves, as is currently possible in unpublished packages.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

There are a number of reasons why a Rust developer currently may feel the need to create multiple library crates, and therefore multiple Cargo packages (since one package contains at most one library crate). These multiple libraries could be:

> * A trait declaration and a corresponding derive macro (which must be defined in a separate proc-macro library).

Reviewer: Should `-sys` packages be a motivation with using this being a recommended path or should we discourage using this with `-sys` 

This was talked about a little at https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2224#issuecomment-348053490

* A library that uses a build script that uses another library or binary (e.g. for precomputation or bindings generation).

> * A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Reviewer 10: (No need to say when open namespace comes and joins the party. While it's a pretty independent feature, the learning curve doesn't look too good when everything gathers…)

> * A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Reviewer: For me, the big concern with `public` + `nested` is when two workspace members do that for the same dependency.  Locally, they will be interchangeable.  When published, they will not.  This delays testing and could confuse users.

> * A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Reviewer: Another use case is that this provides another way for us to break dependency cycles that involve `dev-dependencies`.

Currently, the solution involves dropping the dependency on publish (by not specifying a `version`).  This lacked discovery so by default `cargo add` does it for *all* path dev-dependencies. This negatively impacts crater because it means that any packages with dev-dependency cycles or where `cargo add` was used to add a path dev-dependency, we lose out on a lot of testing with crater.

With this feature, we can instead nest the path dev-dependency.

> * A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Reviewer: > A logically singular library broken into multiple parts to speed up compilation.

Similarly, a `bin` might want to split out a `lib` for local development and testing but not consider it public and not offer semver guarantees for the `lib`.  `cargo-edit` and `cargo-release` are like this.

* The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency.
    * It is an error if a nested dependency does not have a `path` field, or if it has a `version`, `git`, or any other package source field, unless future work defines a meaning for that combination.
    * Workspace inheritance is not permitted; the presence of `workspace.dependencies.*.publish` is an error.

When a nested dependency is present (making its referent be a nested package), the following additional requirements apply:

* The nested package must have `package.publish.nested = true`.
* If the nested package specifies `package.license`, its value must be identical to the parent package's.

  This check is intended only to prevent accidents (such as vendoring a third-party package without considering the implications of redistributing it). It is always valid to omit `package.license` from the nested package, thus making no machine-readable claims about its licensing.

> It is an error for a nested package to have the same package name as the parent package or any other nested package with the same parent package. This is validated by all Cargo operations that would generate or read a lockfile. Rationale: This should ensure that whenever a nested package must be named, such as in an `.crate` archive, potentially in lock files, and potentially in Cargo user interface, the pair of (parent package name, nested package name) is sufficient to uniquely identify the package.

Reviewer: Should we just leave this as a conflict validation check during publish?  That means one less thing to have to validate on every command and this would allow nested packages in nested directories to not be subject to this limitation

* Otherwise, it is copied to `.cargo/packages/<package name>/` within the archive.

`Cargo.toml` files for nested packages are rewritten in the same way as is already done for all packages, except that `path` dependencies which are nested dependencies are kept, rather than stripped out or rejected, as they currently are. Their `path` values may need to be rewritten to point to the nested packages' new location in the archive.

## **`crates.io`**

`crates.io` will allow uploading of packages that contain `path` dependencies that were previously prohibited, as long as:

* The dependency is a valid nested dependency as defined above. This includes that the the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file, and has a valid `Cargo.toml` which declares `package.publish.nested = true`.
* The `path`s in all contained manifests must not contain any upward traversal outside of the parent package (`../../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components as determined to be necessary.

The package index, and the `crates.io` user interface, do not explicitly represent nested packages; the package is presented as if it were a single package:

> * Nested packages’ dependencies are flattened into the listed dependencies of the parent package.

Reviewer 11: I'm a little concerned that this seems like it could be a fairly complex operation to flatten dependencies. For example, how does it handle name collisions? How does it handle fields that aren't normally unified, like the `public` field? I'm not quite sure I see how this could work.

If the intent is to have the resolver not know about nested packages, it seems like that would make it difficult for other parts of cargo to know about those nested packages since they are all driven by the resolver.

Reviewer 11: Another field that can't be readily merged is `links`. Is it an error to have more than one `links` in the tree?

Reviewer: If we don't hide this from the resolver, that opens up other areas of complexity

iiuc
- we would need a way for source ids to refer to these packages
- we would need a way to include these entries in the Index without conficting

Reviewer 12: By merging dependencies we probably have to mean that the index will list all of the dependencies from the merged list. I.E. the list of dependencies will have more than one entry for `foo`. Rather than us merging all references to `foo` into one dependency. I Think, the resolver already has to deal with index entries with duplicate package names, for target specific dependencies and rename dependencies.

If we actually want to merge into one dependency entry, semver constraints are going to make life difficult. `>=1.0.0-alpha, <3.0.0` is not the merger of `>=1.0.0-alpha` with `<3.0.0`. (`1.0.0-alpha` matches the first two but not the third one).

However, if this is not (yet) done, the documentation will still be usable; just with more implementation details visible, and a chance of name collision (which is already possible).

## Workspaces

The presence or absence of a `[workspace]` has no effect on nested packages, just as it has no effect on existing package publication. Nested packages may use workspace inheritance when they are workspace members. Nested packages may be in different workspaces than their parent package.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This increases the number of differences between “Cargo package (on disk)” from “Cargo package (that may be published in a registry, or downloaded as a unit)” in a way which may be confusing; it would be good if we have different words for these two entities, but we don't.

> * It is not possible to publish a bug fix to a nested package without republishing the entire parent package; this is the cost we pay for the benefit of not needing to take care with versioning for nested packages.

Reviewer: However, for the proc-macro case, `=` version requirements are frequently used and so both would need to be published anyways in that case.

* Suppose `foo` has a nested package `foo-core`. Multiple major versions of `foo` cannot share the same instance of `foo-core` as they could if `foo-core` were separately published and the `foo`s depended on the same version of `foo-core`. Thus, choosing nested publishing may lead to type incompatibilities (and greater compile times) that would not occur if the same libraries had been separately published.

>      * If this situation comes up, it can be recovered from by newly publishing `foo-core` separately (as would have been done if nested publishing were not used) and using the [semver trick](https://github.com/dtolnay/semver-trick) to maintain compatibility.

Reviewer 10: Semver trick does solve this problem, but only when those package bumps their MSRV, so this feature won't get adopted until some point. Some popular crates using proc-macros hold a relatively conservative MSRV. The adoption rate might be mild annoying in the short-mid term.
(Granted, other alternatives would have the same issue)

* Support for duplicative nested publishing (that is, nested packages that are nested within more than one parent package) has the following consequences:

>     * May increase the amount of source code duplicated between different published packages, increasing download sizes and compilation time. It's currently possible to duplicate code into multiple packages via symlinks, but this would make it an “official feature”.

Reviewer 10: Along with this, as a side effect, this _might_ provide an easier route for people to vendor code more than it was. The Rust ecosystem is different from 5 years ago, but the initial idea of Cargo/crates.io is to encourage everybody to publish and share codes. And whenever possible, play nice and help fix bugs in upstream.

Again, Rust is not Rust anymore. The old rules might not suitable nowadays since enterprise and other large projects starts using it more. Regardless, the potential consequence of paradigm shift is something we need to be aware of.

Reviewer: > Along with this, as a side effect, this might provide an easier route for people to vendor code more than it was. 

At first I wasn't too concerned about it but then I thought of what `insta` had to do to vendor `yaml-rust`.  They have to copy the code in, merge any `dependencies`, and update any `crate::` relative references.

With this feature, its copy the package directory in, mark it as `nested`, and you are done.

Reviewer: Looking over #2224, two of the participants specifically called out wanting to use it for private forks :/

* The crates.io registry may be cluttered with many packages that are not relevant to users browsing packages. (Of course, there are many other reasons why such clutter will be found.)
* When packages are implementation details, it makes a permanent mark on the `crates.io` registry even if the implementation of the parent package stops needing that particular subdivision. By allowing sub-packages we can allow package authors to create whatever sub-packages they imagine might be useful, and delete them in later versions with no consequences.
* It is possible to depend on a published package that is intended as an implementation detail. Ideally, library authors would document this clearly and library users would obey the documentation, but that doesn't always happen. By allowing nested packages, we introduce a simple “visibility” system that is useful in the same way that `pub` and `pub(crate)` are useful within Rust crates.

> ## Alternatives to nested packages

Reviewer: Another alternative is to add a form of access control related to [open namespaces](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/unstable.html#open-namespaces) so you can have published packages with APIs scoped to the namespace
- Perform this access control at the `cargo`/crates.io level by allowing a published package to be marked as private, disallowing any package to depend on it unless its participating in the namespace.
  - However, namespace membership control is only enforced at the registry level, so for any local development, you can access the private packages by putting yourself in the namespace
- Language level support with a `pub(namespace)` (name to be bike-shedded)

Reviewer: Yes, neither helps with the publishing overhead.

    * Dependencies are followed, but don't need to be specially marked as nested. I consider this undesirable because it could lead to unintended code duplication, if someone adds a dependency during development without thinking about its effect on publishing.

    * Dependencies are disregarded and only directory nesting affects inclusion. This would be a simpler model, keeping packaging closer to "just make an archive of this directory tree", but it means that a workspace with a root package cannot avoid publishing all its `nested` workspace members except by writing `include`/`exclude` rules, there would be no way to specify whether `dev-dependencies` should be nested or stripped, and it does not support nesting a small private dependency in several different published packages.

* Instead of introducing `package.publish.nested = true`, we could only require that dependencies be declared as nested. The disadvantages of this are:
    * May unintentionally duplicate published code between a standalone published package and a nested package

>     * Does not make both ends of the relationship explicit to readers of the code.

Reviewer: Another reason: we want nested packages to have an explicit opt-in is we don't want a happy path for forking other people's packages (if we expanded this feature to more than path-dependencies)

Among this space of possibilities, I see the place of this particular RFC as attempting to be a **minimal addition to Cargo**, building on the existing concept of `path` dependencies to add lots of power with little implementation cost; not necessarily to make sense from a blank slate.

I am not aware of other package systems that have a similar concept, but I am not broadly informed about package systems.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

* We could choose to explicitly prohibit nested packages from specifying a `package.version`, to avoid giving the misleading impression that it means anything. This would be notably stricter than the current meaning of absent `package.version` as of Cargo 1.75, which is that it is completely equivalent to `version = "0.0.0"`. It would also prohibit having a package that is both nested and published to a registry, if that is desired.

> # Future possibilities

Reviewer: Combined with bin deps, we could allow delegating build scripts to a nested package, allowing a more complete environment for its development.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Cargo: Manifest

Two new possible values are added to the manifest.

* The `package.publish` field allows `"nested"` as a value, in addition to existing `false` and `true`. This value affects `cargo publish` and nested dependencies as described below.
* The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency. (If desired, `publish = false` could be also be permitted to explicitly document an intent not to nest; this would be identical to the status quo and to omitting the key.)
    * It is an error if a nested dependency does not have a `path` field, or if it has a `version`, `git`, or any other package source field, unless future work defines a meaning for that combination.

When a nested dependency is present (making its referent be a nested package), the following additional requirements apply:

* The nested package must have `package.publish = "nested"`; both `false` and `true` are errors.

> * If the nested package specifies `package.license`, the parent package's (not necessarily the dependent's) license expression must comply with the nested package's. This check is done solely in terms of the operators in the license expression. For example, if two nested packages contain licenses of `MIT` and `BSD-3-Clause`, then the parent package's expression must be `MIT AND BSD-3-Clause` or similar.

Reviewer: Licensing is complicated and I wouldn't feel comfortable with signing off on anything but
- exact match
- no rule

without some deep investigation

* We might want to explicitly prohibit nested packages from specifying a `package.version`, to avoid giving the misleading impression that it means anything. (`package.version` is already optional as of Cargo 1.75, but this is currently equivalent to `version = "0.0.0"`.)

## **`cargo package` &amp; `cargo publish`**

If `cargo package` or `cargo package` is directed to operate on a package whose manifest specifies `package.publish = "nested"`, that is an error. (Users wishing to make crates in a nested package public should either write `package.publish = true` or should re-export their contents from another package.)

When a valid parent package is packaged, each of its transitive nested dependencies must be included in the `.crate` archive file. This has two sub-cases:

* The nested package may be in a subdirectory of the parent package directory. In this case, it is copied to the same location in the archive.

> * Otherwise, it is copied to `.cargo/packages/<package name>/` within the archive.

Reviewer: Can there be duplicate package names?  What happens in that case?

Author: I was thinking that duplicate package names would be prohibited within a given parent package, as they currently are for local `path` dependencies. I should add that to the text.

Author: I have specified that package names must be unique within a parent package; and furthermore that this is an error at build time and not just packaging time (so that the lockfile need not deal with distinguishing different arbitrarily-deep duplicates).

> `Cargo.toml` files for nested packages are rewritten in the same way as is already done for all packages, except that `path` dependencies which are nested dependencies are kept rather than stripped out or rejected as they currently are. Their path values may need to be rewritten to point to the nested paackages' new location in the archive.

Reviewer: `paackages` -> `packages`

Author: Fixed.

## **`crates.io`**

`crates.io` will allow uploading of packages that contain `path` dependencies that were previously prohibited, as long as:

* The dependency is a valid nested dependency as defined above. This includes that the the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file, and has a valid `Cargo.toml` which declares `package.publish = "nested"`.
* The `path`s in all contained manifests must not contain any upward traversal outside of the parent package (`../../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components as determined to be necessary.

> The package index, and the `crates.io` user interface, does not explicitly represent nested packages; instead, nested packages' dependencies are flattened into the dependencies of the parent package when they are added to the index. This adequately reflects what can be expected when using the parent package. (Note that required dependencies of optional nested packages should become optional in the flattened form.)

Reviewer: we need to include flattening the effect of features

Two new possible values are added to the manifest.

> * The `package.publish` or `workspace.package.publish` field allows `"nested"` as a value, in addition to existing `false` and `true`. This value affects `cargo publish` and nested dependencies as described below.

Reviewer: I have mixed feelings on allowing `nested` to be inherited.  In part, I feel like its a weird default for the full workspace but I also appreciate leaving the individual building blocks and letting users decide what to do.

* The `dependencies.*.publish` field is newly defined, with the only currently allowed value being `"nested"`, to declare that that dependency is a nested dependency. (If desired, `publish = false` could be also be permitted to explicitly document an intent not to nest; this would be identical to the status quo and to omitting the key.)
    * It is an error if a nested dependency does not have a `path` field, or if it has a `version`, `git`, or any other package source field, unless future work defines a meaning for that combination.

>     * Workspace inheritance is not permitted; `workspace.dependencies.*.publish` is an error at `cargo package`/`cargo publish` time. (Builds should ignore the field, for forward compatibility.)

Reviewer: Why is this only an error on publish and not on build / parse?  We add new fields all the time and break people.  Its part of why the unused manifest key warning exists, to let people know they are in danger of being broken.

Author: I think what I was thinking was that if inherited `workspace.dependencies.*.publish` becomes a thing, it shouldn't break builds by users who just want to build the code and aren't responsible for publishing it. But we can certainly start with making it unconditionally an error.

  This check is intended only to prevent accidents (such as vendoring a third-party package without considering the implications of redistributing it). It is always valid to omit `package.license` from the nested package, thus making no machine-readable claims about its licensing.

> It is an error for any two of the packages in the transitive closure of nested dependencies (including the parent package) to share a package name. This is validated by all Cargo operations that would generate or read a lockfile.

Reviewer: Please rewrite without talking about dependency closures.  That is fairly jargony and jargon can get in the way of communication.  For example, I've been working on multiple build systems for over a decade and yet I have no idea what the use of "closure" means in this context.

Author: Done.

* The dependency is a valid nested dependency as defined above. This includes that the the named package in fact exists in the `.crate` archive file, and has a valid `Cargo.toml` which declares `package.publish = "nested"`.
* The `path`s in all contained manifests must not contain any upward traversal outside of the parent package (`../../`) or other hazardous or non-portable components as determined to be necessary.

The package index, and the `crates.io` user interface, does not explicitly represent nested packages; the package is presented as if it were a single package:

* Nested packages' dependencies are flattened into the dependencies of the parent package.

> * The packages selected by nested packages' features must be rewritten in terms of the parent package's features.

Reviewer: Took me a couple times reading this to understand what it means

What about

> For optional dependencies of nested packages, the parent package be updated to correctly activate the dependencies, whether that involves unconditionally enabling them or having its features activate them

Author: I've rewritten this section and included several sub-cases to explain what it means. Better?

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks!
